# AspiringMinds
An analysis of the Aspiring Minds data-set with Machine Learning
Project ContextThe education system in India is different from that of the United States in many aspects. Students in US educational institutions have the option of picking elective courses of their choice and interest which helps them  in  understanding what  career  path  to  pursue.  In India,  most educational  institutions  do  not  offerthe same flexibility when it comes toelective courses. As a result,students often find it difficult to gauge their actual professional interests. In  India,  undergraduate  engineering  students  do  not  have the  frequent  and  easy access  to  career  fairs (like  the  ones  organized  in  US  universities)  and  this  adds  to  their  confusion  when  it  comes  to  deciding what role would be best suited to them as a career. Engineering colleges in India simply invite a plethora of  companies  to  hire  students  for  different  full-time  roles  and  students  apply  to  these  roles  without completely understanding these roles. The  four  of  us  have  faced  the above-mentionedproblems  ourselves  and  we  feel  that  undergraduate engineering students could benefit from a model that could help them identify roles that are best suited to the them. This can be done keeping in mind the academic scores of a student which gives an indication of the strengths, weaknesses and possible interests of the student.Our project takes the help of Aspiring Minds, an organization that conducts aptitude tests (AMCATs) for engineering  students.  Aspiring  Minds  has  tie-ups  with  various  technical  companies  which hire  students based on a student’s AMCAT performance, academic profiles and overall profiles. We intend to talk about all this in greater detail in our final project report.Primary Questions•Given a student's academic scores, what are common types of positions that may be suitable for her/him at their preferred location and what could be the expected salary for those positions?•Given a student’s academic scores,other demographic information and desired job designation and  salary,  what  specific  academic  score  must  the  student  improve  upon  to  increase  her/his chances of landing the desired job and by how much?•Do people of different genders get different salaries despite having similar scores? Are there other factors that need to be controlled in order to strengthen the correlation?
Dataset and PreprocessingDataset DescriptionThis dataset is part of the Aspiring Minds' Employment Outcomes 2015 data challenge organized by the organizationCODS   (http://ikdd.acm.org/Site/CoDS2016/datachallenge.html).   The   dataset   contains information  about  engineering  students  and  their employment  outcomes.  Each  record  of  the  dataset consists of an anonymized students  profile/academic scoring information along with  their employment outcome information. There are a total of 5000 recordsand 33 features.Candidate Profile Information includes:•Scores on Aspiring Minds’ AMCAT –a standardized test of job skills. The test includes cognitive, domain and personality assessments•Personal information like gender, date of birth, etc.•Pre-university information like high school grades, high school location•University information like GPA, college major, college reputation proxy.•Demographic information like location of college, candidates’ permanent locationEmployment Outcome Information includes:•First job annual salary•First job title•First job locationPreprocessing•Standardize Text Fields–The below text fields have inconsistent data in terms of value encodings, for instance, ‘business system analyst’ vs ‘business systems analyst’, so they needed to be cleaned.oDesignationoJobCityo10board  (The  board  type  of  10  grade  examinations -different  boards  have  different scorings)o12boardoSpecialization•collegeGPA field had values with a range of 10 (eg 6.7) along with values with a range of 100 (eg 88); this scale was corrected•CollegeID and CollegeCity field values are hashed, we still use them as they hold predictive power•The scores for a number of different test sections were reported to be -1. Since these sections are not mandatory for every test taker, there is a high chance that -1 indicates that the section was not attempted.
Prior WorkAspiring Minds’ Employability Outcomes 2015 dataset was part of a data challenge organized by the organizationCODS: http://ikdd.acm.org/Site/CoDS2016/datachallenge.html.There  has  been  prior  work done on the dataset, including regression analysis and salary predictions using various machine learning models:•http://research.aspiringminds.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/TEAM-DS-Final_report.pdf•http://research.aspiringminds.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Paper13_CameraReady.pdf•http://research.aspiringminds.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Paper29_CameraReady.pdf•http://research.aspiringminds.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Paper11_CameraReady.pdfMethodsFeature EngineeringThe  training  dataset  has  4000  rows  and  1000  rows  are  held  out.  We  will  decide  on  the  exact  feature extraction process once we delve more into our project. We will need to further divide our training data into to two sets: training and validation.Machine LearningWhen  predicting  probabilities  of  a  candidate  landing  in  a  job  profile,  we  are  essentially  classifying  the candidate’s features and associating a probability with each job class.Owing to the high dimensionalityof the data, we plan use random forests and neural networks to build a high accuracy classifier. Further, we would use gradient descent with cross-validation to tune our model’s hyperparameters to minimize the loss in our model.Additionally,  we  will  regress  our  features  to  fit  a  salary  prediction  model  and  select  features  with  the Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) method using the sklearn library in Python.Model Success MetricsThe advantage of the type of questions we have chosen is that they are easy to validate with the given dataset.When predicting job types, having a large number of types of jobs doesn’t help predicting as then, we have less number of rows corresponding to each job. When transforming those jobs to experience levels or  domains,  we  could  predict  probabilitiesbetter  as  then  there  would  be  more  number  of  rows corresponding to each job level/domain. A baseline accuracy will be established once the data is cleaned and the features are transformed.
Other features which contained string values have been ignored since such statistics would make no sense for those features.Figure 1: Correlation matrix using some of the metric variables from the dataset which will be integral in building our model and in our analysis1We have a dataset of 33 features that we believe can answer our questions. However, while finding answers to thesequestions there is a possibility that we might end up eliminating or combining some of these features.
Figure 2: Q-Q Plot of SalaryA Quantile-Quantile plot of the variable Salary, which is an important part of our primary questions. Seeing theplot, we can conclude that the Salary variable is close to a normal distribution which means that Salary can be predicted using data analysis and machine learning techniques
